# \# 20190726235552 2001 Emotion Evans

\# \# 20190726235552 2001 Emotion Evans\
\# 20190726235552 2001 Emotion Evans\
tags= AI, Notes, Mustafa, Evans, 2001, Emotion\
PdfID=\
\# Formatted Reference\
Evans, D., 2003. Emotion: A very short introduction. OUP Oxford.\
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Will AI ever be capable of experiencing emotions?

At first the answer would seem counterintuitive, but some scientists believe it is possible. Philosophers disagree. For example, John Searle has argued in his famous Chinese Room Argument that a person can work with a language without understanding what it means, if he has been provided enough rules about that language. His metaphor seem to indicate that computers do things without being conscious of what it is doing.

Today's machines do imitate emotions. It is hard to say whether they are conscious; most likely they aren't.

However, looking at the origin of emotions, Dylan Evans (2001) defines it as something that happens when our continuing mental state is 'interrupted'. He cites Herbert Simon, who, in 1967, suggested that, emotions do so because we have to respond to sudden change in the environment.

This seems reasonable. The author argues in his book that emotions have evolutionary origins. Emotions such as fear has helped us survive the wild.

A new kind of algorithms have evolutionary attributes. Named \'Genetic Algorithms\', these programs can copy themselves, and fight with one another over remaining memory spaces. When faced with unpredictable threats, these programs can mutate. The author argues, this has remarkable similarity with natural selection. As an evidence, he mentions the \'Tierra\' --- a virtual biosphere for digital organism, where it was proved that algorithms are capable of evolving too.

While it may not be plausible that given the current state, such algorithms can mutate to the level of having emotions since they are merely virtual, the author does mention that researchers are working on \'Evolutionary Robotics\' where programs are allowed to let robots design themselves, paving way for self-evolution and hence the possibility of becoming conscious over time.

In summary, the argument that the author presents at the end of the book is that-\
1. Emotion is vital to the survival of any half-intelligent species.\
2. If a Robot that has evolutionary programming and has an evolving body capable of becoming conscious, then left to their own devices these robots might at some point be capable of experiencing emotions.

I agree with the author from a different viewpoint. Emotions are at the end of the day neuronal computations. If computations are the basis for all emotions in humans, then computers capable of performing computation at similar level of complexity should be capable of having emotion. To have that kind of complexity, the computers should have a body that is capable of having computations at such complexity. If AIs can achieve that level of complexity, then perhaps AIs would be capable of emotions as well.

\#Mustafa \#notes \#2001\# \#Emotion \#AI \#Evans
