# \# 20190707003024 2019 Chapter 3 Idea Mustafa

tags= #Chapter-3, #Consciousness, #BBI, #Cognition, #Dissertation

PdfID= ＃Formatted Reference

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My hypothesis is that functional link between two brains serves to unite consciousness and perception.

I take the Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness, which says that

\"consciousness arises when a system has a rich representation repertoire and its subsystems are strongly interconnected. However, when the integration within a subsystem is larger than the connection between subsystems, consciousness will arise as a function of the subsystem rather than of the system as a whole.\" (Pinto et al, 2017 p.846)

\"In split-brain patients, intrahemispheric connectivity exceeds interhemispheric connectivity, and thus each hemisphere should give rise to an independent conscious agent \[96\].\" (Pinto et al, 2017 p.846)

I take this as a starting point for formulating my thesis that functional link between two brain can serve as uniting cosciousness and perception. It is still unclear at this point what would be the nature of consciousness and perception be like for a composite brain.

Of many possibilities I consider three prominent possibilities for this kind of functionally linked brains.

1.  The functional link can unite perception and consciousness and attention
2.  The functional link can unite consciousness and attention but not perceptions
3.  The functional link can unite consciousness but not perception and attention.

I argue for the third possibility that functional link can unite consciousness but not perception and attention. In other words, two functionally linked brain perception and attention could be split but consciousness may be unified.

I propose that if one accepts classical view of split brain syndrome then the possibilities are -

1.  brains connected by functional link should show divided consciousness, perception and attention

However, if one accepts the new model of split brain syndrome then the possibilities are that-

1.  brains connected by functional link should show united consciousness but divided split perception and attention

Pinto et al. 2017 argues that \"If consciousness is indeed mostly dependent on functional structure, then preserved functional unity could underlie conscious unity in the split-brain syndrome.\" (p.847) In the case of functional link between brain to brain interfaces, the unity of consciousness could be preserved through the functional link as functioned the corpus callosum in split brain patients.

\#Dissertation \#BBI \#Cognition \#Chapter 3\# \#Consciousness
