# \# 20200323170705 \[Block, N.\] \[1989\] \[Can the Mind Change the World\]

\# \[Block, N.\] \[1989\] \[Can the Mind Change the World\]\
20200323170705

Can the Mind Change the World?

Ned Block

The Paradox of the Causal Efficacy of Content

Block maintains that the following claims about Casual Efficacy of Content are true but incompatible-

1\. The intentional content of a thought is causally relevant to its behavioural effects

2\. Intentional content reduces to the meanings of the internal representations

3\. Internal Processors are sensitive to syntactic forms of internal representation rather than their meanings.

Block concludes that the solution to this incompatibility actually leads to functionalism indicating the justification of epiphenomenalism.

I. The Premises

1\. Causally relevant property: Block maintains that mental events have contents because they are caused by some other mental events that have contents. Thus behaviour is causally related to the intentional content of the mental state (thoughts, beliefs, desires)

2\. Intentional content (Content of thoughts) are reduced to a system of certain representations so that the computational relations can manipulate those representations to provide certain outputs.

3\. "Internal processors are sensitive to the syntactic form of the internal representations as they process their meanings."

Block mentions that a reductionist proposal is that if content properties could be identified with neurophysiological properties, then causal efficacy of the the neural would guarantee of the causal efficacy of the content.

But on the other hand computational state is mutiply realisable, so content cannot be identified with physical realisers of the content

Block mentions a specific nomist approach where non-strict psychological laws involving content are causally relevant which is held to objection because there can be correlation without causation.

To resolve this problem, the nomist approach can be reformulated

Block refers to Fodor's idea that if there's is a causal law such that

F(A) causes G(B)

Then F is causally relevant to B

Block raises question as to how to know whether A and B as content and behaviour are causally related. For A and B to be related, they must also be causally related.

Counterfactual Argument: If the meanings of the internal representation are their functional roles, then epiphenomenalism is not true.

Are meanings of their internal representation their functional roles?

1\. Functional roles are causal roles (Block, 1989, p.151), Internal representations are causally relevant to behaviour and behaviour is dependent on function, therefore, Internal representations are casually relevant to functional roles.

3\. The meaning of internal representation are only observer-inherited meanings and are reduced from Intentional processes. (Block, 1989, p.?)

2\. The meaning of internal representation require semantic manipulation by functional processes. But Functional processes are sensitive only to syntaxes. (Block, 1989, p.?) and are not sensitive to semantic properties of internal representation.

7\. Therefore, Functions are not meanings of their internal representation.

8\. Therefore, Counterfactual argument is not true.

9\. Therefore, Epiphenomenalism is true.

According to the counterfactual argument, "a given syntactic object would have caused the same output even if it had meant something quite different from what it actually means."

According to Block, Functional role theory of meaning suggests that, by meaning, it is meant the representation for the functional accounts, rather than semantic meanings.

This implies that, if meaning is functional role, then a difference in meaning requires different functional roles and different functional roles require different causes/effects.

If internal processors are sensitive to syntaxes and semantics, then functional role is causally efficacious.

\-\--

\*\*Reference\*\*

\
Block N. (1989) Can the mind change the world? In: Boolos GS (ed) Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam. Cambridge University Press, 137-170.

\#1989\# \#Functionalism \#Block \#Mental Causation\# \#Epiphenomenalism \#Philosophy \#Philosophy of Mind\#
