# \# 20200323170724 \[Fodor, J.\] \[1974\] \[Special Sciences\]

\# \[Fodor, J.\] \[1974\] \[Special Sciences\]\
20200323170724

Special Sciences (The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypothesis)

Fodor claims that all true theories in the special sciences should be reducible to physical sciences.

Fodor maintains that reductionists endorse the generality of physics with regards to special sciences. Fodor says, such reductionism implies that the two are the same thing.

Fodor argues that reducibility physics is taken as a constraint when it comes to special sciences. Fodor indicates that what causes the confusion is the claim that since psychology and science deal with the similar subject-matter, psychology could be reduced to science.

Reductivism according to Fodor is that psychological theories can be reduced to physical theories.

He mentions bridge laws, which are symmetric relationships, are used to make reductive claims and explains that the truth of reductivism does not guarantee the generality of physics with regards to psychology.

Fodor also explains that Token physicalism emerges out of attempt to use bridge laws to express event identities--- "if every event falls that under the proper law of the special science, falls under a bridge law" then "all the events that sciences talk about are physical events"

Fodor maintains that

1\. Token physicalism is weaker than Materialism because Materialism accepts token physicalism and that every event falls under the laws of some science or other. Therefore all materialists can be token physicalists but all token physicalist cannot be materialists.

2\. Token physicalism is weaker than type physicalism because all token physical events can fall under a specific type physical event, but not all type physical events can fall under a token physical event.

3\. Token physicalism is weaker than reductivism because, reductivism is the conjunction of token physicalism and an assumption (that the natural predicates of science correspond to natural predicates of special sciences)

Fodor focuses on 3 that reductivism cannot be inferred from token physicalism. In other words, he maintains that a token physical stance is a non-reductive stance.

II\.

"If psychology is reducible to neurology, then for every psychological natural kind predicate there is a co-extensive neurological natural kind predicate, and the generalisation which states this co-extension is a law." (Fodor, 1974, p. 104)

Lashley's view, according to Fodor, is that -"it is entirely possible that the nervous system of a higher organisms characteristically achieves a given psychological end by a wide variety of neurological means." But Fodor thinks this view undermines "the attempt to pair the neurological structures with psychological features" (Fodor, 1974, p. 104)

Fodor emphasises that the type-reductivism stems from the mistaken interpretation of token-physicalism.

He also doubts that the co-extension of neurological natural kinds and psychological natural kinds cannot be lawlike.

He argues that the nomologically possible systems such as psychological Automata satisfies natural kind predicates in psychology but not in neurology. He strengthens his argument with Putnam's view that the psychological nature can be realized in multiple physical forms. So if psychology can be realized in multiple physical forms, then the relationship between natural kind in psychology and the natural kind in neurology cannot be type identical but token identical.

According to type physicalism, neurological and psychological natural kinds are homogenous therefore identical therefore psychology can be reduced to neurology.

But according to Fodor, this is impossible, because, according to multiple realizability a certain type of psychological state can be realized by type heterogenous neurological states. Therefore, the claim that psychology can be reduced to neurology through token physicalism is mistaken.

III

Fodor maintains that, the taxonomies of special sciences taxonomy of the physical sciences are not the same. But the laws governing the subject of special sciences and the physical sciences are the same, yet in the special sciences generalisations allow for exceptions whereas in physical sciences there is no room for exception.

Fodor then asks, why there are special sciences at all?

The answer is that it is difficult to speak in neurological taxonomy and communicate ideas, which is rather easy in special sciences, because it allows for generalisations. Yet it is precisely the generalisation and acceptance of exceptions that constraints the reducibility of psychology to science.

\-\--

\*\*Reference\*\*

\
Fodor JA. (1974) Special sciences (or: The disunity of science as a working hypothesis). Synthese 28: 97-115.

\#1974\# \#Physicalism \#Philosophy of Mind\# \#Fodor
