# \# 20200323175118 Sihlobo W. - A review of game theory - Cited from Researchgate

\# Sihlobo W. - A review of game theory - Cited from Researchgate\
20200323175118

Chapter Extract 1

"Game theory applies in many studies of competitive scenarios, therefore the problems are called games and the participants are called players. A player is defined by Osborne (2002) as an individual or group of individuals making a decision." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.3)

Summary / Paraphrase 1

In competitive scenarios, game theory can be applied where problems are seen as games and participants as players. In such a scenario, players are defined as decision makers affecting the outcome of the game. (Sihlobo, 2012, p.3)

Chapter Extract 2

"Kerk (n.d.) also argued that a game is any situation where there are at least two players. However Turocy & von Stengel (2001) highlighted that a game with only one player is usually called a decision problem. These players may be individuals, groups, firms, nation or any combination of these. A study by Turocy & von Stengel (2001) also reveals that the game theory provides a language to\
formulate structure, analyse, and understand strategic scenarios." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.4)

Summary / Paraphrase 2

Games Theories usually consider circumstances as two player games but games such as a Decision Problem are one player problems where the player may be \"individuals, groups, firms, nation or any combination of these." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.4).

The framework of game theory allows to \"formulate structure, analyse, and understand strategic scenarios." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.4)

Chapter Extract 3

"Game theory applies whenever the actions of several agents are interdependent." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

"According to Turocy & von Stengel (2001) the purpose of study in game theory is game. There players involved in a game are arranged in their preferences, their information, the strategic actions available to them, and how these influence the outcome." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

"Game theory is generally divided into two branches, which are non-cooperative and cooperative game theory (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994)." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

Summary / Paraphrase 3

Chapter Extract 4

"Non-cooperative game theory focuses on strategic choices resulting from interaction among competing players, each player choses its strategy independently for improving its own utility (Lim, 1999). Turocy & von Stengel (2001) suggested that non-cooperative game theory specifically means, this branch of game theory explicitly represent the process in which players make choices out of their own interest. Turocy & von Stengel (2001) further suggested that in the model of non-cooperative game theory the details of the ordering and timing of players' choices are crucial in determining the outcome of a game. Several concepts such as the Nash equilibrium exist for solving non-cooperative games." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

Summary / Paraphrase 4

Non-cooperative game theory analyses strategic decisions where the goal is to improve personal utility of the players who are independent in the choice they make in the game. In this theory, players are explicitly interested in maximising their personal utility. (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

Chapter Extract 5

"While, non-cooperative game theory focuses on competitive scenarios, cooperative game theory provides analytical tools to study the behaviour of rational players when they cooperate. The main focus of cooperative games describes the formation of cooperating groups of players that can strengthen the players' positions in a game. Lim (1999) views cooperative game theory concepts as sets of payoff combinations that satisfy both individual and group rationality. As one example of how cooperative game theory can naturally be applied is situations arising in political science or international relations, where concepts like power are most important (Turocy & von Stengel, 2001)" (Sihlobo, 2012, p.5-6)

Summary / Paraphrase 5

\"cooperative game theory provides analytical tools to study the behaviour of rational players when they cooperate.\"(Sihlobo, 2012, p.5)

Cooperative game theory provides a strategy for players of both sides to cooperate on a problem to strengthen their own payoffs. Cooperative game theory can be applied to issues in international political relations where power is a major payoff for the players. (Sihlobo, 2012, p.6)

Chapter Extract 6

"Davis (1997) explained dominance using an example called the Prisoner's Dilemma, where 'Two men are suspected of committing a crime together are arrested and placed in separate cells by the police. There is enough evidence to convict each of them of a minor offense, but not enough evidence to convict both of them of the major crime unless one of them acts as an informer against the other. Each suspect may either confess or remain silent, and each one knows the possible consequences of his action.' Davis (1997) further presented that they were both told that if they both confess, they both go to jail for five years. If they both do not confess then both go to jail for a year, but if only one of them confesses then the other goes to jail for twenty years while the confessor walks out free." (Sihlobo, 2012, p.6)

Summary / Paraphrase 6

Prisoner's Dilemma shows that if the two prisoners independently cooperate they both might have better payoffs. While if there is distrust, both of them lose the payoffs. And if there is a lack of trust, one gets the payoff while the other loses it. Prisoner's dilemma shows that communication is extremely important in turning non-cooperative game into cooperative game. When the prisoners make independent choices, there is more probability to act on self interest. But when the prisoners act cooperatively, even if they act on self-interest, the payoffs strengthen the position of both of the players equally.

Chapter Extract 7

" \"

Summary / Paraphrase 7

Chapter Extract 8

" \"

Summary / Paraphrase 8

Chapter Extract 9

" \"

Summary / Paraphrase 9

Bibliography

\`\`\`\
Sihlobo, W. (2012) A review of game theory. Cited from researchgate. net.\
\`\`\`

\#Critical Review\# \#Poor Referenced\# \#Game Theory\# \#Sihlobo W.\#
