# 20200327005700 Some Thoughts on Global Pandemics 

Immediately after the breakout of Covid-19 from Wuhan, China, the world was set for a new stage. In a recent new briefing, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Chief of World Health Organization (WHO) has stated that the world is in \"uncharted territory\" on the coronavirus outbreak. Covid-19 did not create or escalate a psychological tension worldwide, it just made it easier to reveal it.

The first stage of the psychological tension was cultural. We may remember the period, where individuals across the world were suddenly assaulted. The grounds for such assault were that they were Chinese or resembled the Chinese. Such behaviour was only indicative of the mass psychology across the world. We may also remember the sudden upsurge of the racist propaganda that belittled the Chinese Food Culture. Such normalization of behavior only suggested that the burden, at the time was only on the Chinese.

The immediate next wave therefore was panic and misinformation. Social media has long allowed for creating contents, but far less methods for verification of such contents. The result of crowdsourcing contents thus have led to the payment of a serious price. Social media plays dubious role in spreading information. Although a fast news source of infomration, we have learned that it is also a faster source of misinformation. In case of Covid-19, social media has magnified the panic of an individual to many, and borne on this panic, misinformation has been able to spread even faster.

It may have gone unnoticed, but algorithmic bias has a lot to play in this panic too. Social media algorithms are designed to show us the type of contents that we click most, view most. Thus, those who have thought of taking a snapshot of the situation are probably surrounded by hoards of Coronavirus related news by now. Panic is therefore not only being escalated by human factors, but also algorithmic features.

It is interesting to observe that worldwide the masses (and their representatives) value the immediate threat more than serious long-term and terminal threats. It has been long argued that automotive and flight industries have been contributing to the Carbon Emissions worldwide, and in simple ideas, the more people travel, the more emissions, and the more global warming. While most people wouldn't stop travelling for Climate Change, they have certainly stopped for Covid-19.

Covid-19 has also shown us that most of us are incapable of empathy, that when faced with serious threats, we rest everything on countries affected, then the government- it has shown that we truly do not care about global threats until it isn't in our vicinity. This kind of mindset is particularly dangerous. We seem to fail to appreciate that the world is more connected than ever, and simply ignoring a problem and resting it on others is not going to be helpful in the longrun.

There may be valid responses to this perspective. Immediately before the Covid-19 outbreak, the world was already experiencing many atrocities. In Mianmar, Syria, Palestine, India and China, communal tensions and political conflicts have scarred the lives of many. It may be highlighted that here too the same psychology was at work. The idea that it is not our burden until it is truly our burden.

Political disagreements often stem from three things. Cultural difference, Economic Interest and Historical Factors. Covid-19 has shown us that threats of its kind do not discriminate between race, culture and political ideology. It was only deemed a threat when our Economic Interest fell common in everyone's list.

Covid-19 is a lesson that fiction can coincide with reality, and unless taught otherwise, people end up following the fiction. With Covid-19 now declared a global pandemic, the states imposing lockdown, we have learned that masses tend to act in their self interest rather than their collective interest. That the poor suffer more than the wealthy and in more numbers, and that we still hoard in the face of imminent danger instead of working towards a solution.

Covid-19 as a global pandemic has come to us at great costs and with greater lessons. It has taught us the perils of global connectivity, real and virtual. It has also shown that globally we are not adequately prepared to take effective measures in the face of such crises, and this is not only technical but also political and psychological. Covid-19 is probably one of the firsts to make a history, but it is certainly not the last. In order to prepare for future crises like this at global scale, we may have very few windows to rectify ourselves.
