# \# 20190715230931 2008 A Universe of Consciousness Edelman and Tononi

\# \# 20190715230931 2008 A Universe of Consciousness Edelman and Tononi\
\# 20190715230931 2008 A Universe of Consciousness Edelman and Tononi\
tags= Edelman, Tononi, Consciousness, 2008\
PdfID=\
\# Formatted Reference\
Edelman G and Tononi G. (2008) A Universe of Consciousness How Matter Becomes Imagination: How Matter Becomes Imagination: Basic books.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\*\* Chapter 2 \*\*

\# Assumptions

\#\# 1. Physics Assumption\
Consciousness is a special kind of physical process that arises in the structure and dynamics of certain brains.

Conscious experience as a fundamental physical process can be characterised by certain general or fundamental property.

\#\#\# Physical properties of Consciousness

1\. Integration: Conscious state cannot be subdivided\
Example: You cannot do two things at once

2\. Differentiation / informativeness: \"At any moment, one, out of billions of possible conscious states can be selected in a fraction of a second\"

\#\# 2. Evolutionary Assumption\
Consciousness is associated with biological structures and depends on certain dynamic processes generated by certain morphology.

It also implies that it is a recent development and not all animal species share it.

\#\# 3. Qualia assumption\
The qualia states that subjective, qualitative aspects of consciousness are private and cannot be communicated directly through scientific theory that is by nature public and intersubjective.

The main task is to Scientifically explain consciousness and it\'s properties

\#\# Philosophical attributes that may need pondering\
1. Being comes first, describing second.\
2. No description can take place of subjective experience of conscious qualia\
3. Doing generally precedes understanding\
4. Selectionism (evolution) precedes logic

\#\# Questions

\- Why should the activity of certain nerve cells or neurones in the brain correlate with the succession of private phenomenal states that we call conscious experience while other neurones are deprived of such remarkable property?

\- Why is it that the activity of neurones in the retina that differentiate between light and dark is not directly associated with conscious experience while certain neurones higher up in the visual system apparently is?

This is the central problem of conscious experience.

\#\# Approaches

\- In the following chapters, the authors examine what kind of neural processes actually explain the fundamental properties of consciousness rather than merely correlate with them.

\#2008\# \#Tononi \#Edelman \#Consciousness
