# \# 20200323175039 ROE

\
20200323175039

In the writing game, we are all beginners, my main objective is to make it work.Rather than create something revolutionary. I know that clarity is hard won but it is important. I will maintain economy of words, no need for unnecessary prolonging. My style would be such that it should show no sign of effort. The langugage will have energy, and I will write and rewrite to ensure so.

My writing would be honest, it should convey the truth. I write to improve on the truth.

When I write for myself, the audience should be pleased, even if they are not, the fact is I still write for myself. I calculate and design, and that is the fun.

I have interest in how language works as it is key to how I operate. My writing should be spontaneous, as if it is easy to make, even though it could take me years to make it.

I read, and I read as a writer to improve, I know that influence and imitation are not anxieties they are techniques.

I acknowledge that practicing writing is necessary so I write often and when possible.

I know that character and stamina is important in enduring as a writer.

As a thumb rule, I accept that showing is more effective than telling, and I write what I know to write what I don\'t know. I write to find a voice of my own.

My writing is distinctive and can be and should be differentiated from other authors. I make use of forms, when capable, I will be able to break or bend it to my ease, but I must master it first.

I should rewrite the adjectives and adverbs, avoid striking phrases, cliches and arcahisms, inversions. I practice writing in concrete langauage.

I have learned that audiences do not wait, they are made. The fun in writing is in writing and not in publishing.

There are no rules except those that I set for myself.\
 
