# \# 20200323171927 Intentionality 2

\# Intentionality\
20200323171927

Technical term for a distinguishing feature of states of mind: the fact that they are 'about' or represent things. The term derives from the medieval Latin intentio, a scholastic term for the ideas or representations of things formed by the mind.

The term was revived in 1874 by Franz Brentano for 'the direction of the mind on an object'. Brentano's idea was that intentionality is the mark of the mental: all and only mental states are intentional. This idea, often known as Brentano's thesis, can be expressed by saying that one cannot believe, wish, or hope without believing or wishing something.

\`\`\`\
Beliefs, wishes, desires, hopes, and the like are therefore often called 'intentional states'. (\*Propositional attitudes.)\
\`\`\`

Contemporary philosophers sometimes describe the intentionality of mental states as their 'aboutness'. Used in this way, 'intentionality' does not necessarily involve the idea of intention---in the sense that actions are intentional (though somewhat confusingly, intentions are intentional states in the sense under discussion). The term should also be distinguished from the logical notion of \*intensionality. Intensionality is a feature of certain logical and linguistic contexts which exhibit the following features: (i) they are referentially opaque---substitution of co-referring expressions in a sentence may change the truth-value of the sentence; (ii) they do not license existential generalization---from 'Fa' we cannot infer 'There exists an x such that Fx'. Ascriptions of intentional states certainly can exhibit intensionality in this sense. If I believe that Aristotle wrote the Posterior Analytics, it doesn't follow that I believe that Alexander's teacher wrote the Posterior Analytics, since I might not believe that Aristotle was Alexander's teacher. So ascriptions of intentionality can be opaque. Also, if I want to visit the lost city of Atlantis, it does not follow that something exists which I want to visit. So ascriptions of intentionality do not license existential generalization. But other non-psychological contexts exhibit intensionality too---notably, those contexts involving the ideas of necessity and possibility. (\*Modality.) Thus while 'Necessarily Aristotle is Aristotle' is true, 'Necessarily, Aristotle was the teacher of Alexander' is (on the face of it) false. So treating intensionality as the mark of intentionality will not yield intentionality as the mark of the mental. (In fact, most contemporary philosophers deny that all mental phenomena are intentional in any case, on the grounds that sensations like pains are not 'directed' on anything.) Moreover, it is arguable that there are ascriptions of intentionality (in the sense of 'aboutness') which do not exhibit intensionality. If I see the Pope, and the Pope is a Polish man, then it plausibly follows that I see a Polish man. There is also a sense in which if I see something, there is something that I see. So there seem to be cases of ascriptions of intentionality which are not intensional. Most contemporary philosophers therefore treat intensional contexts as a general phenomenon of which some of those attributing intentionality are a special case. However, those like Quine who are suspicious of intensionality will use this suspicion as grounds for attacking the psychological notion of intentionality, in the course of attacking intensionality generally. The intensionality of psychological ascriptions does, however, indicate a number of troublesome features of the idea of intentionality.

Intentional states can be about objects that do not exist and they seem to be individuated in many cases not merely by the objects thought about but by the way they are thought about. (\*Representation; \*sense and reference.) How can such a peculiar phenomenon as intentionality be part of the natural order of the world? Contemporary answers to this question---the problem of intentionality---have thus been concerned with 'naturalizing' intentionality. This usually takes the form of giving some account of how intentional states are causally related to the things they are about.

t.c.\
\*belief and desire; mind, syntax, and semantics; intentional relation.

Franz Brentano, Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint (London, 1973).\
H. Field, 'Mental Representation', Erkenntnis (1978).\
W. Lyons, Approaches to Intentionality (Oxford, 1995).\
Roger Scruton, 'Intensional and Intentional Objects', Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1970--1).\
John Searle, Intentionality (Cambridge, 1983).

\#Intentionality
