# \# 20200323170718 \[Demopoulos, W. \] \[1990\] Extract 1 \[42\] \[Critical Notice Hilary Putnam's Representation and Reality \]

\# \[Demopoulos, W. \] \[1990\] Extract 1 \[42\] \[Critical Notice: Hilary Putnam's Representation and Reality \]\
20200323170718

Extract 1

\"According to Putnam, computationalism seeks a general theory of mentality in the sense of a theory that will describe all physically and computationally possible systems that are capable of being in some mental state. Putnam\'s principal objection to computationalism is that it fails to yield a sufficiently general account of our mental states" - (Demopoulos, 1990, p.326)

Summary

Bibliography

Demopoulos, W. (1990) Critical Notice: Hilary Putnam's Representation and Reality Putnam, H. (ed.). Philosophy of Science, 57 (2): 325--333. Available at: \[http://www.jstor.org/stable/187840\](http://www.jstor.org/stable/187840).

The multiple realisability argument holds that for a psychological kind (i.e. pain) there can be many distinct physical kinds (i.e. physical realisers). (SEP, ?)

Fodor (1974) explains that creatures with distinct physical structures realising distinct psychological states can nonetheless experience same psychological state.

Person A can feel pain, Person B can feel pain.

A is composed of Hydrocarbon, B is composed of Silicon.

Although Hydrocarbon and Silicon are not the same, according to Multiple Realizability, A and B should both be able to feel pain, even though pain realisers of A and B are not the same.

The brain state hypothesis argues that Mental kind is identical to physical kind.

Putnam (1960, ?) argues against the brain state hypothesis. It states that if- (According to Type-Identity theorists) Mental kind is identical to physical kinds then

1\. Physical Kind of A =/= Physical Kind of B

2\. Therefore, Mental Kind of A =/= Mental Kind of B

But is seems the case that Mental Kind of A = Mental Kind of

3\. therefore Physical Kind of A should be identical to Physical Kind of B

But if A = Human and B= Mollusc then 3. is not true.

Therefore, Type-identity theory is not true.

Identity theorists object that by virtue of evolution, the pain bearers have one thing in common--- that is they have similar physical-chemical kind to experience the type identical pain states. But they also argue that any other physical kind that do not have similar physical-chemical kind (i.e.silicon based systems) will not be able to realize pain as we do because they lack the similar elemental physical composition, structure and complexity.

Putnam claims that these objections are \""certainly ambitious" and very probably false\" because early identity theories were empirical hypotheses. (SEP, ?)

I intend to argue on this point that having similar physical-chemical kind is necessary to experience similar mental kinds, and that this proves the multiple realizability ontologically mistaken to certain extent.

The structure of the argument is as follows,

Let us assume that,

Two entity, A and B whose

Physical Realizers are (PR)A and (PR)B

PRs determine the Computational System(CS) of A and B

These are, by sequence, (CS)A and (CS)B

PRs are determined by the Elemental Composition (PR-EC) and Structural Complexities (PR-SC). More specifically, (PR-EC) at atomic level determines the (PR-SC) at more macro level. Together, (PR-EC) and (PR-SC) determine the nature of Physical Realisers.

Let us assume, for A and B

Elemental Compositions are (PR-EC)A and (PR-EC)B

Structural Complexities are (PR-SC)A and (PR-SC)B

The multiple realizability argument holds that-

(CS)A = (CS)B

Even though (PR)A =/= (PR)B

PR is the complex physical structure that acts as realisers for computational systems

The idea that, (PR)A =/= (PR)B

Entails that (PR-EC)A =/= (PR-EC)B

Therefore, (PR-SC)A =/= (PR-SC)B

But if the structural complexity of A and B are different,

Then it entails that (CS)A =/= (CS)B

In other words, in theory they will have different computational systems.

If this is the case, then, the multiple realizability argument does not hold.

If one reconsider the variables A and B in the following manner,

A= Silicon based entity

B= Hydrocarbon based biological entity

It follows that, it is highly unlikely that a silicon based entity will have the same mental type as hydrocarbon based biological entity.

\#Putnam \#Computational Theory of Mind\# \#Demopoulos \#Extracts \#Philosophy of Cognitive Science\# \#1990\# \#Philosophy of Mind\#
