# \# 20200323174301 Multiple Realizability

\# Multiple Realizability\
phinixgreen/Critique-of-CTM-V.2\
20200323174301

Muhammad Mustafa Monowar edited this page just now · \[3 revisions\](https://github.com/phinixgreen/Critique-of-CTM-V.2/wiki/Multiple-Realizability/\_history) \
1.1 What is Multiple Realizability?\
The multiple realizability thesis about the mental is that a given psychological kind (like pain) can be realized by many distinct physical kinds: brain states in the case of earthly mammals, electronic states in the case of properly programmed digital computers, green slime states in the case of extraterrestrials, and so on. Correctly characterizing the realization relation remains a contentious matter in analytic metaphysics (Gillett 2003, Polger 2004). But whatever the correct account turns out to be, the multiple realizability thesis about the mental is that a given psychological kind (like pain) can stand in that relationship to many distinct physical kinds.\
\#\#\# Definition

\> For a psychological kind (i.e. pain) there can be many distinct physical kinds (i.e. physical realisers)\
In a pair of examples illustrating multiple realizability in special sciences (economics and psychology), Jerry Fodor (1974) implicitly distinguished between two types of the relation. Call the first type, illustrated in the examples provided at the end of the previous paragraph, multiple realizability "over physical structure-types": creatures with distinct physical structures realizing their psychological states can nevertheless entertain the same psychological states.\
\#\#\# Fodor\'s Multiple realizability over physical structure-types

\> Fodor (1974) explains that creatures with distinct physical structures realising distinct psychological states can nonetheless experience same psychological state.\
\> A can feel pain, B can feel pain.\
\> A is composed of Hydrocarbon, B is composed of Silicon.\
\> Although Hydrocarbon and Silicon are not the same, according to Multiple Realizability, A and B should both be able to feel pain, even though pain realisers of A and B are not the same.\
A more radical type of multiple realizability would obtain if a token physical (e.g., nervous) system can realize a single mental kind via distinct physical states of that same system at different times. Call this second sense multiple realizability "in a token system over times." (These terms are from John Bickle 1998, Chapter 4.) This second sense is more radical because there could be a disjunction of physical states realizing each mental kind for every existing cognizer. The importance of the more radical type is discussed further (section 1.5 below).\
1.2 Arguments Against "Reductive" Mind-Brain Identity Theories\
In a series of papers published throughout the 1960s, Hilary Putnam introduced multiple realizability into the philosophy of mind. Against the "brain state theorists," who held that every mental kind is identical to some as-yet-undiscovered neural kind, Putnam (1967) notes the wide variety of terrestrial creatures seemingly capable of experiencing pain. Humans, other primates, other mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and even mollusks (e.g., octopi) seem reasonable candidates. But then for the "brain state theory" to be true, there must be some physical-chemical kind common to this wide variety of pain-bearing species, and correlated exactly with each occurrence of the mental kind. (This is a necessary condition of the hypothesized type-identity.) But comparative neuroanatomy and physiology, facts about convergent evolution, and the corticalization of function (especially sensory function) as cortical mass increases across species all speak against this requirement.\
\#\#\#\# Brain State Hypothesis

\> Mental kind is identical to physical kind.\
\#\#\# Putnam\'s (1960) Argument

\> The multiple realisability argument was proposed against the brain state hypothesis. It states that if- (According to Type-Identity theorists) Mental kind is identical to physical kinds then\
1. Physical Kind of A =/= Physical Kind of B\
2. Therefore, Mental Kind of A =/= Mental Kind of B

But is seems the case that Mental Kind of A = Mental Kind of\
3. therefore Physical Kind of A should be identical to Physical Kind of B

But if A = Human and B= Mollusc then 3. is not true.\
Therefore, Type-identity theory is not true.

In addition, early mind-brain identity theorists insisted that these identities, while contingent, hold by virtue of natural (scientific) law. But then any physically possible cognizer (e.g., pain-bearer) must also be capable of possessing that physical-chemical kind. Here the well-known philosophers\' fantasies enter the discussion. Silicon-based androids, artificially intelligent electronic robots, and Martians with green slime pulsating within their skulls all seem to be possible pain realizers. But they lack "brain states" comparable to ours at any level of physical description. Further still, these mind-brain identity theories were supposed to be completely general. Every mental kind was held to be identical to some neural kind. So the critic needs to find only one mental kind, shared across species yet realized differently at the physical-chemical level. Putnam acknowledges that the early identity theories were empirical hypotheses. But one of their consequences was "certainly ambitious" and very probably false.\
\#\#\# Objections from Identity theorists

\> By virtue of evolution, the pain bearers have one thing in common. that is they have similar physical-chemical kind to experience the type identical pain states.\
\> But they also argue that any other physical kind that do not have similar physical-chemical kind (i.e.silicon based systems) will not be able to realize pain as we do because they lack the similar elemental physical composition, structure and complexity.\
\#\#\# Putnam\'s Reply

\> Putnam claims that these objections are \""certainly ambitious" and very probably false\" because early identity theories were empirical hypotheses.\
Stated in canonical form, Putnam\'s original multiple realizability argument draws an anti-identity theory conclusion from two premises:\
1. (the multiple realizability thesis) All mental kinds are multiply realizable by distinct physical kinds.\
2. If a given mental kind is multiply realizable by distinct physical kinds, then it cannot be identical to any specific physical kind.\
3. (the anti-identity thesis conclusion) No mental kind is identical to any specific physical kind.\
In this simple form, this is a deductively valid argument.\
Fodor (1974) extended Putnam\'s initial argument by arguing that reductionism imposes too strong a constraint on acceptable theories in special sciences like psychology. According to Fodor, reductionism is the conjunction of "token physicalism" with the claim that there are natural kind predicates in an ideally completed physics corresponding to each natural kind term in any ideally completed special science. He characterized "token physicalism" in turn as the claim that all events that science talks about are physical events---a weaker thesis than reductionism or type-type physicalism.\
Consider the following string of numerals: 1 1 2. This string contains two types of numerals (1 and 2), but three tokens of the two types (two tokens of the numeral type 1 and one token of the numeral type 2). Mental states admit of a similar ambiguity. When you and I both entertain the belief that Fodor advocates a Language of Thought, one type of mental state is entertained, but two tokens of that type (your belief state and my belief state). Type-type physicalism insists that types of mental states are identical to types of physical states; this view runs afoul of multiple realizability. But token physicalism only insists that each token occurrence of each type of mental state is identical to some token occurrence of a physical state type---not necessarily an occurrence of a token of the same physical state type on each occasion.\
Fodor gave reductionists the best-developed theory of reduction at the time: Ernest Nagel\'s (1961) "derivability" account of intertheoretic reduction. Nagel\'s account "connects" disparate elements of the reduced and reducing theories\' vocabularies via "bridge laws" (not Nagel\'s term!) and claims a reduction when the laws of the reduced theory are derived from the laws of the reducing and the bridge laws. According to Fodor (1974), if reductionism is to establish physicalism, these cross-theoretic bridge laws must assert (contingent) identities of reduced and reducing kinds. But given multiple realizability, the only way this can obtain is if the physical science constituent of a psychophysical bridge law is a disjunction of all the terms denoting possible physical realizations of the mental kind. Given the extent and variety of actual (not to say possible) physical realizations, it is overwhelmingly likely that the disjunctive component will not be a kind-predicate of any specific physical science. It is also overwhelmingly likely that the disjunctive component will not appear in any genuine law of a specific physical science. Multiple realizability thus demonstrates that the additional requirement of reductionism (beyond token physicalism) is empirically untenable.\
1.3 Arguments for Functionalism\
The multiple realizability premise has also been used, albeit more indirectly, in early arguments for functionalism. Functionalism in the philosophy of mind individuates mental states in terms of their causes and effects. Pain, for example, is caused by tissue damage or trauma to bodily regions, and in turn causes beliefs (e.g., that one is in pain), desires (e.g., that one relieves the pain), and behaviors like crying out, nursing the damaged area, and seeking out pain relieving drugs. Any internal state that mediates a similar pattern of causes and effects is pain---regardless of the specific physical mechanisms that mediate the pattern in any given case. Ned Block and Jerry Fodor (1972) note that the multiple realizability of mental on physical types shows that any physicalist type-identity hypothesis will fail to be sufficiently abstract. Functionalism, on the other hand, seems to be at the next level of abstraction up from explanation of behavior based on physical mechanisms. In addition, it seems sufficiently abstract to handle multiple realizability. Block and Fodor also note that multiple realizability at the level of physical description is a common characteristic of ordinary functional kinds, like mousetraps and valve lifters. Characterizing mental kinds as functional kinds thus appears to be at exactly the right level of abstraction to handle multiple realizability. It is a reasonable empirical hypothesis in light of this feature of mental states.\
Notice that this argument for functionalism is explicitly non-deductive, in contrast to the deductive (and valid) nature of Putnam\'s original argument against identity theories. It is important to keep the anti-identity theory argument separate from the pro-functionalism argument, as some criticisms of multiple realizability may be telling against one but irrelevant against the other.\
Many contemporary nonreductive materialists deny that mental kinds can be identified with functional kinds. Some of their criticisms of functionalism hinge on issues about individualism in psychology. But Putnam has used multiple realizability to argue against functionalism itself. In specifying the nature of mental kinds, many functionalists followed Putnam (and Fodor) by adopting "Turing machine functionalism": mental kinds are identical to the computational kinds of a suitably programmed universal Turing machine. Putnam (1988), however, has argued that mental kinds are both "compositionally" and "computationally" plastic. The first point is his familiar multiple realizability contention of the mental on the physical. The second contends that the same mental kind can be a property of systems that are not in the same (Turing) computational state. In this work, multiple realizability strikes back at the very theory of mind it initially motivated.\
1.4 The Argument from Psychological Explanation\
Psychologist Zenon Pylyshyn (1984) appeals to multiple realizability to ground a methodological criticism of reductionism. He described a pedestrian, having just witnessed an automobile accident, rushing into a nearby phone booth and dialing a 9 and a 1. What will this person do next? Dial another 1, with overwhelming likelihood. Why? Because of a systematic generalization holding between what he recognized, his background knowledge, his resulting intentions, and that action (intentionally described). We won\'t discover that generalization, however, if we focus on the person\'s neurophysiology and resulting muscular contractions. That level of explanation is too weak, for it cannot tell us that this sequence of neural events and muscular contractions corresponds to the action of dialing a 1. A given physiological explanation only links one way of learning the emergency phone number to one way of coming to know that an emergency occurred to one sequence of neural events and resulting muscular contractions producing the behavior (nonintentionally described). However, the number of physical events constituting each of these cognitive classes---the learning, the coming to know, and the action of dialing---is potentially unlimited, with the constituents of each class often unrelated to each other at the physiological level of description. (This is Pylyshyn\'s appeal to multiple realizability.) So if there is a generalization at the higher level of description available for capturing (and in the pedestrian example there surely is), an exclusively reductionist approach to psychological explanation will miss it. Thus because of multiple realizability, reductionism violates a tenet of scientific methodology: seek to capture all capturable generalizations. (Fodor 1975, Chapter 5, and Terence Horgan 1993 raise related methodological caveats about reductionism resting ultimately on multiple realizability. Bickle 1998, Chapter 4, responds to these.)

Sources:\
1. \[SEP\](https://plato.stanford.edu/)

Press h to open a hovercard with more details.

Measure\
Measure

https://github.com/phinixgreen/Critique-of-CTM-V.2/wiki/Multiple-Realizability

\#Fodor \#Putna \#Multiple Realizability\# \#Computational Theory of Mind\#
