# \# 20200323170801 \[Putnam, H.\] \[1967\] \[Psychological Predicates\]

\# \[Putnam, H.\] \[1967\] \[Psychological Predicates\]\
20200323170801

Chapter 11

Psychological Predicates

Hilary Putnam

1\. Identity Questions

Putnam asks if pain is a brain state

In the paper, Putnam uses the term property for being in pain for being in a particular brain state

He differentiates between property and concept.

\> Property is a psychological predicate.

\> Concept is the mental Phenomenon.

Putnam implies that being in pain as a concept can be with or without acknowledging the Property of with a psychological predicate '\_\_\_\_ is in pain'.

Putnam mentions two instances of concepts-

"Pain is a brain state"

"Pain states are brain states"

II\. Is pain a brain state?

Putnam thinks, "pain is not a brain state"

Putnam introduces probabilistic automata and Turing machines.

Putnam claims that a physical realisation can of different probabilistic automata based on description of the automata's machine table.

In a machine table, certain states are defined by sensory input and motor output and the processes leading from input to output. He calls this the functional organisation of the description.

Putnam maintains that the knowledge of total state of a system will allow for predicting motor outputs. But this does not involve knowing the physical realisation of the states.

Putnam's Hypothesis is that-

1\. All organism capable of feeling pain are probabilistic automata.

2.1 All organisms being probabilistic automata, have at least one Description of a kind.

2.2 Being a probabilistic automata and having a description, (feeling pain then is a functional organisation of appropriate input, output and processing)

3\. All organisms capable of feeling pain cannot have a Description in parts.

4\. For every Description, there is a subset of sensory inputs such that the organism is in pain, some of the sensory inputs are in that subset.

For 2 and 4, Putnam claims that psychology can prove the statements.

III\. Functional state versus brain states

According to the brain state hypothesis, physical chemical states are such that

If any organism is in pain

Iff a) it possesses a specific physio-chemical structure and

b\) the brain is in that physio-chemical structure

This implies that, according to Putnam, the specific physio-chemical structure required to realize pain is available in all organism capable of feeling pain, e.g. humans, octopuses, reptiles.

Then it is plausible that either, only humans feel pain and the other organisms do not or the brain state hypothesis is mistaken about the identity relations between brain and psychological state.

But Brains state theorists are reductive physicalist, who want to reduce the psychological states to physical states.

With psychological predicates such as

A Human is in pain

B Reptile is in pain

Putnam shows that for the same type of psychological state there are multiple physical realisers.

Putnam mentions that a brain-state theorist "has to hope for the eventual development of neurophysical laws that are species-independent" (Putnam, 1967, p.165)

\#Putnam \#Psychological Predicate\# \#1967\#
