# \# 20200323174246 Multiple Realizability (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)

\# Multiple Realizability (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)\
20200323174246

\#\#\# 2.2 Domain-Specific Reductions

David Lewis (1969) argues that the inconsistency between the reductionist\'s thesis and multiple realizability evaporates when we notice a tacit relativity of the former to contexts. A common sense example illustrates his point. The following three claims appear inconsistent:\
\> (1) There is only one winning lottery number.\
\> (2) The winning lottery number is 03.\
\> (3) The winning lottery number is 61.\
These three similar claims likewise seem inconsistent:\
\> (1′) (the reductionist thesis) There is only one physical-chemical realization of pain.\
\> (2′) The physical-chemical realization of pain is C-fiber firing.\
\> (3′) The physical-chemical realization of pain is ... (something else entirely).\
((2′) and (3′) reflect the multiple realizability contention.) But there is no mystery in how to reconcile (1) -- (3). Append "per week" to (1), "this week" to (2), and "last week" to (3). Similarly, append "per structure-type" to (1′), "in humans" to (2′), and "in mollusks" to (3′). Inconsistencies evaporate. Lewis\'s point is that reductive identities are always specific to a domain.\
Many reductionist philosophers have elaborated on Lewis\'s point with scientific examples. Patricia Churchland (1986, Chapter 7), Clifford Hooker (1981), Berent Enç (1983), and other philosophers of science have described historical intertheoretic reductions where a given reduced concept is multiply realized at the reducing level. A common example is the concept of temperature from classical equilibrium thermodynamics. Temperature in a gas is identical to mean molecular kinetic energy. Temperature in a solid, however, is identical to mean maximal molecular kinetic energy, since the molecules of a solid are bound in lattice structures and hence restricted to a range of vibratory motions. Temperature in a plasma is something else entirely, since the molecular constituents of a plasma have been ripped apart. Even a vacuum can have a ("blackbody") temperature, though it contains no molecular constituents. Temperature of classical thermodynamics is multiply realized microphysically in a variety of distinct physical states. Yet this is a "textbook" intertheoretic reduction and cross-theory identification. The reductions and identifications are specific to the domain of physical state.\
Lewis\'s original insight also underlies Kim\'s (1989, 1992) appeals to structure-specific "local reductions." Kim agrees that multiple realizability rules out a general reduction of (structure-independent) psychology to physical science. But it permits (and even sanctions) a local reduction to a theory of the physical mechanisms of a given structure-type. (Kim admits that the relevant structure-types here will probably be narrower than biological species.) Local reductions involve "structure-specific bridge laws" where the mental-physical biconditional occurs as the consequent of a conditional whose antecedent denotes a specific structure-type (e.g., "if X is a member of structure type S, then X is in mental state M iff X is in physical state P"). Conditionals whose antecedents denote different structure types will typically have biconditionals as consequents whose mental term- constituents are co-referential but whose physical term- constituents denote different physical events. Multiple realizability forces this much revision to the bridge laws of classical reductionism. But according to Kim, local reductions are the rule rather than the exception in science generally, and are sufficient for any reasonable scientific or philosophical purpose. Kim\'s approach is another way to express the tacit domain specificity in scientific reductions.\
\#\#\# 2.3 Neuroscience\'s Successes

Kim (1992) suggests and Bickle (1998, Chapter 4) emphasizes that guiding methodological principles in contemporary neuroscience assume continuity of underlying neural mechanisms. This assumption informs most experimental techniques and theoretical conclusions drawn from experimental results. Continuity is assumed both within and across species. If radical multiple realizability really obtained among species in the actual world, contemporary neuroscientific experimental techniques built upon this assumption should bear little fruit. Why study the macaque visual system to investigate human visual processing, for example, if we can\'t safely assume some continuity across species? Why should positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) reveal common areas of high metabolic activity during psychological task performance, both across and within individual humans---now down to a millimeter of spatial resolution? Standard neuroscientific experimental procedures and even clinical diagnostic tools would be hopelessly naïve in the face of significant multiple realizability. But these procedures and tools do work (and are not hopelessly naïve).\
Kim and Bickle insist that these successes are evidence that psychological functions are not as radically multiply realized as functionalists and anti-reductionists suggest. Even neural plasticity is systematic. It has a regular progression following damage to a principal structure; there are underlying neural mechanisms that subserve it. Furthermore, function following damage is often seriously degraded. Persons can still talk, manipulate spatial representations, or move their extremities, but their performance is often qualitatively and quantitatively less than normal. This fact gives rise to tricky questions about individuation of psychological function. Are these alternative neural structures realizing the same psychological function---the same mental kind---as before? (This last response has been further developed. See the next section below.)\
Bechtel and Jennifer Mundale (1999) provide the most extensive empirical details about hypothesized or assumed brain type-identities across species in neuroscientific practice. Their explicit target is a methodological consequence sometimes drawn from the multiple realizability premise: if psychological states are multiply realized across biological species, then neuroscience---the scientific study of brains---will be of little use toward understanding cognition. But as details of the neuroscience of vision demonstrate, neuroscientists have successfully used understanding of the brain to decompose cognitive visual function. The neuroscientific goal has been to\
\> show how functional considerations get built into developing the structural taxonomy and how that taxonomy in turn can be a heuristic guide in developing information-processing models. This project has not been impaired by multiple realization of psychological states; rather, it relies on the assumption that there is a common realization of mechanisms for processing visual information across species. (1999, 201)

It is difficult to argue with the empirical successes that have obtained. So even if one accepts the multiple realizability contention, one should be hesitant to draw strong consequences about psychology\'s methodological autonomy from it.\
\#\#\# 2.5 Denying Projectibility

Besides his appeal to species-specific bridge laws and local reducibility, Kim (1992) offers two additional replies to the multiple realizability argument. His "denying projectibility" reply starts from the familiar fact that the kind "jade" fragments into jadeite and nephrite. Jade is thus incapable of passing the projectibility test for nomicness because of its genuinely disjunctive nature. Multiple realizability of psychological kinds yields the same consequence. Instead of rendering psychology an autonomous special science, multiple realizability implies that there is no structure-independent scientific psychology. There are only "local" scientific psychologies, each reducible to the theory of the underlying physical mechanisms of the structure-type in question.\
Closely related is Kim\'s "causal powers" reply. Scientific kinds are individuated by their causal powers, and the causal powers of each instance of some realized kind are identical to those of its realizer. From these principles it follows that instances of a mental kind with different physical realizations are distinct kinds. Thus (structure-independent) mental kinds are not causal kinds, and hence are disqualified as proper scientific kinds. Multiple realizability yields the failure of structure-independent mental kinds to meet the standards of scientific kinds. Notice that Shapiro\'s "dilemma" (discussed in section 2.4 above) is in the spirit of Kim\'s "causal powers" argument.\
Kim\'s argument has attracted critical attention. As part of their defense of the autonomy of the mental, Louise Antony and Joseph Levine (1997) insist that it is not vast multiple realizability that makes a property unprojectible---for a property like "having mass of one gram" is the former but isn\'t the latter. The projectibility of a nomic property only guarantees the projectibility of shared properties that "are constitutive of or nomically connected to it" (p. 90, authors\' emphases). This renders Kim\'s appeal to the jade analogy problematic for mental properties. Block (1997) argues that kind-ness is both relative and graded, and so projectibility is always with respect to particular types of properties. Specifically, Block distinguishes two types: D properties, which are selected (though not necessarily selected for) and whose physical realizations are subject to constraints imposed by laws of nature; and realization properties, which are due to the peculiarities of some specific realization. Block argues that Kim\'s unprojectibility argument is correct (and important) for realization properties of mental kinds; but there are also genuine D properties of mental kinds (not yet well understood) and these do project from one realization to others, even in light of vast realization differences.\
Fodor (1997) distinguishes disjunctive from multiply realized properties. The former, like jade, are neither projectible nor nomic; but the latter, like mental properties (as construed by functionalists) are both. Kim\'s analogy between jade and pain breaks down, and thus so does his conclusion about the unprojectibility of the latter. This undercuts the remaining steps in his argument for reduction. Gene Witmer, on the other hand, (2003) accepts Kim\'s "linking hypothesis" connecting the unprojectibility of the disjunctive sum of physical realizers with the unprojectibility of the functional kind itself. Instead he challenges the unprojectibility of the disjunctive sum. There are categories whose instances share nothing in common except abstract relational features whose denoting expressions occur in generalizations that are confirmable by their positive instances (the key feature of projectibility). Witmer cites examples like "papers written after brainstorming," "products produced by the same company," and "a good night\'s sleep." An argument might overturn our intuitive verdict of confirmability by positive instances for generalizations containing these terms but the burden is on the denier. This is Witmer\'s "Moorean" premise: "it is a Moorean fact that we have good reason to believe, on the basis of a number of positive instances, generalizations about pain" (67). Now the linking hypothesis turns Kim\'s argument on its head. By modus tollens, the disjunctive sum of physical realizers of pain is likewise projectible. (Witmer also provides various readings of Kim\'s "Inexplicability argument" based the causal exclusion principle and argues that each reading fails.)\
\#\# 3. The Continuing Legacy of Multiple Realizability

At present, nonreductive physicalism (probably) is still the dominant position in Anglo-American philosophy of mind. Its proponents continue to appeal to the standard multiple realizability argument (see section 1 above) to challenge all versions of psychophysical reductionism and identity theory. However, the recent challenges over the past decade have attracted some notice. Versions of type-identity theory and reductive physicalism have made comebacks (Gozzano and Hill, 2012). Perhaps the nonidentity of mental content properties with any physical properties is no longer "practically received wisdom," as Ernest LePore and Barry Loewer called it more than two decades ago?\
Criticisms of these new challenges are also starting to amass. Carl Gillett and Ken Aizawa have been the most vocal recent defenders of multiple realizability. Gillett (2003) develops a precise framework for understanding compositionality relations in science generally, and uses this framework to define property realization and multiple realization, and to distinguish two senses of realization. The first sense, "flat" realization, involves both realized and realizing properties inhering in a single object. The second sense, "dimensioned" realization, involves realized and realizing properties inhering in distinct individuals standing in a compositional relationship. This distinction is important for two reasons, according to Gillett (2002, 2003). First, scientific explanations employ dimensioned realizations, as inter-level mechanistic explanations relate distinct individuals, Second, Fodor and other proponents of the standard multiple realizability argument assumed a dimensioned account. But the arguments of Shapiro and other recent critics (see section 2 above) challenge the existence of multiple realizability only by assuming flat realization, and no recent critic has defended flat realization as the correct account involved in the scientific cases at issue.\
Applying Gillett\'s precise framework explicitly, Ken Aizawa and Gillett defend the existence of multiple realization in a variety of sciences (2009a) and "massive multiple realization" about human psychological properties at every level of organization, from the structure and function of proteins in neurons to social interactions (2009b). Their detailed focus in the latter essay is visual processing. They contend that neuroscientists, unlike philosophers, are unfazed by massive multiple realization. Multiple realization has been so contentious in philosophy of mind, they insist, because philosophers both tacitly assume flawed accounts of realization like the flat view, and due to an accepted narrative linking multiple realization to the strict methodological autonomy of psychology from neuroscience. Aizwa and Gillett (2009b) conclude, however, that the empirical details of vision research shows that a co-evolutionary research methodology is not just consistent with, but explicitly motivated by massive multiple realization. So this narrative not only helps to blind philosophers to facts that scientists recognize as unproblematic; it is also empirically false.\
More recently, Aizawa and Gillett (2011) distinguish two strategies scientists might adopt to deal with putative cases of multiple realization. One strategy is simply to take multiple realization at face value. The other is to split the higher-level multiply realized kind into a variety of sub-kinds, one for each of its distinct lower level realizers, and then eliminate the original higher-level kind, at least for the purposes of further scientific investigation and development. Do scientists always favor the second strategy, as recent philosophical critics of multiple realizability would seem to recommend? With its well-known distinctions between different types or systems, memory research would seem regularly to have employed this "eliminate-and-split" strategy. Yet Aizawa and Gillett argue that such an assessment oversimplifies the actual scientific details in even these much-discussed cases. Here too they sense an important general methodological lesson: psychology takes account of neuroscience discoveries, so even taking multiple realization at face value does not imply strict methodological autonomy. But the actual details of how psychology takes neuroscientific discoveries into account depends both on the nature of the psychological kinds in question and the needs of theorizing specific to psychology.\
Aizawa has also challenged many of the specific recent challenges to the standard multiple realizabilty argument. After separating three distinct arguments in Bechtel and Mundale (1999) (discussed in section 2 above), Aizawa (2008) sets his critical sights on their Central Argument, which argues against multiple realization from the existence and continued success of brain mapping studies. He argues that Bechtel and Mundale misrepresent the actual nature of these studies and methods employed in functional localization studies. Working with exactly the scientific examples Bechtel and Mundale discuss (mostly from the functional neuroanatomy of vision) Aizawa argues that claims about psychological functions do not play the specific role in these studies that Bechtel and Mundale insist, and so the success of these studies does not imply the falsity of multiple realization. Later in that paper Aizawa challenges two of Bechtel and Mundale\'s key insistences. He denies that if psychological properties were multiply realized, then functional taxonomy of the brain would have to be carried out independently of psychological function. And he denies that multiple realization rules out comparisons of brains across different species. Hence all the premises of Bechtel and Mundale\'s Central Argument are false. Aizawa (2007) criticizes Bickle\'s (2003) argument (discussed in section 2 above) that a unitary realization of memory consolidation across species has been found at the level of molecular mechanisms, despite widespread neural differences in these brains at higher levels of neuroscientific investigation. According to Aizawa, the protein components of these evolutionarily conserved molecular mechanisms, and the molecular-genetic components coding for them, are themselves multiply realized. Finally, Aizawa (forthcoming) presents numerous scientific examples of multiple realization by "compensatory differences." In such cases, changes to one or more properties that jointly realize a realized property G are compensated for by changes in others of the jointly realizing properties. Although his overall goal in this paper is to bring this form of multiple realization to wider recognition and study by philosophers of science, he uses the broader "Gillett-Aizawa framework" to argue that highly specific determinate properties, not just generic determinable properties, are multiply realized in this specific fashion. Such multiply realized determinate properties are indeed exactly similar across distinct realizations, and so answer the dilemma posed by Shapiro and others (discussed extensively in section 2 above).\
Recent critics of the standard multiple realizability argument have likewise not been quiet. Lawrence Shapiro (2008) raises some methodological difficulties involved in testing whether a given psychological kind actually is multiply realized. (For a related argument see Thomas Polger 2009.) Shapiro reminds us of the crucial role that auxiliary assumptions play in hypothesis testing generally (within a broadly hypothetico-deductive model), and considers a collection of explicit auxiliary assumptions that might be implicitly used to establish a multiple realization hypothesis. He presents a recent ferret brain-rewiring experiment as a scientific example (in which axonal inputs from the primary visual tract were redirected in ferret embryos to project to primary auditory cortex---see Sharma et al. 2000 for the actual scientific details). An auxiliary hypothesis requiring multiply realized higher-level (in this case, psychological) kinds to be "exactly similar"---identical---across distinct realizers won\'t help the proponent of the standard multiple realizability argument with this purported case.. It is easy to measure better visual performance in the normally-wired control ferrets compared to the re-wired experimental animals. While the experimentally re-wired animals have some visual function, it is diminished significantly compared to controls. "Exact similarity" (identity) of visual function is thus not present across these groups. On the other hand, one might argue for the multiple realizability premise in this ferret re-wiring case using an auxiliary hypothesis that only requires similarity in multiply realized higher level properties, yet still requires that differences across the realizers should not be limited only to the differences that cause differences in the realized (in this case, visual) properties. (Shapiro remarks that this auxiliary assumption seems best to capture the sense of multiple realization stressed by proponents of the standard argument.) But if we adopt it, again the ferret re-wiring case seems not to provide an empirical instance of multiple realization. Shapiro remarks: "the differences in ferret brains explain nothing more than differences in ferret visual properties" (2008, 523). Shapiro also argues that his detailed discussion of hypothesis testing difficulties for any multiple realization hypothesis reveals a flaw in Bechtel and Mundale\'s (1999) influential criticism (discussed in section 2 above). Bechtel and Mundale\'s examples, drawn from the comparative functional neuroanatomy of vision, only compare homologous brain structures. But these only have differences that make a difference in their visual properties, nothing else. Instead of these examples, Shapiro insists, "one should be looking at different brains that reveal similar visual properties despite their differences" (2008, 524)---exactly the kinds of evidence that Bechtel and Mundale\'s emphasis on homologies doesn\'t consider.\
Shapiro and Polger (2012) build upon their accounts of the complexity of actually testing for scientifically-justified multiple realization. They insist that it renders the significance of multiple realization far more dubious than philosophers of mind typically suppose. They introduce explicit criteria to capture the common assumption that multiple realization requires not merely differences between realizing kinds, but "differently the same"-ness: the features of entities A and B that lead them to be classified differently by the realizing science S2 "must be among those that lead them to be commonly classified" by the realized science S1 (2012, 282, criterion iii). This explicit criterion rules out a common appeal to camera eyes with different photoreceptive chemicals in their retinal cones from being genuine (empirical) instances of multiple realization. Considered coarsely, such eyes are doing the same thing in the same way, so they\'re not "differently the same." Considered finely, the two kinds of eyes are sensitive to different ranges and peaks of spectral stimulation, so they\'re "differently different, not differently the same" (2012, 283--284).\
Shapiro and Polger\'s final explicit criterion captures the "differently the same" intuition in terms of quanitative differences: the relevant variation between entities A and B in realizing science S2 "must be greater than" the individual differences between A and B recognized by realized science S1 (2012, 282, criterion iv). The variation recognized by the realizing science must not merely map onto individual differences between A and B recognized by the realized science. The demands in actually establishing multiple realization are thus quite strict. Not any old variation will do. According to Shapiro and Polger, these strict demands show both that multiple realization in the sense required to fund the standard argument is "a relatively rare phenomenon"---despite the vast variability everywhere in the world---and that a "relatively modest" mind-brain identity theory has little actually to worry about from it (2012, 284).\
Similar in some ways to Couch\'s arguments (discussed in section 2 above), Colin Klein recently raises a challenge to scientific contributions made by multiply realized kinds. Noting the varieties of things that materials science classifies as 'brittle,' Klein (2008) notes that few to none of the many scientific discoveries about realization-restricted brittle things---about brittle steel, for example---generalize to other realization-restricted types (like brittle glass). Klein insists that generalizations about genuine scientific kinds should be projectable across instances of those kinds, so this requirement seems not to be met by a significant class of multiple realized kinds (the realization-restricted ones). Applying this point to psychological kinds, instead of supporting a scientifically-backed nonreductive physicalism, it appears rather that special sciences should abandon multiply realized kinds. Klein notes that proponents of scientifically-based multiple realizability can find terms in special sciences that figure in legitimate explanations, and so appear to refer to projectable multiply realize kinds. But close investigation of some paradigmatic examples reveals these to be idealizations of actual kinds. Special-science kind-terms are thus typically ambiguous. Sometimes a given term refers to an actual but realization-restricted kind. Other times it refers to features of explanatory but non-actual idealized models. (Klein 2008 illustrates this ambiguity with his detailed example from materials science.) Neither suffices to provide a kind of actual multiple realization that the standard argument requires. However, he insists that his argument isn\'t entirely negative for non-reductive physicalists. Idealizations can function in explanations that are autonomous in an important sense from lower level sciences. And Kim\'s (1996) assumption, that all explanatory work in science must appeal to realization-restricted kinds and properties (discussed in section 2 above), is simply incorrect. Still, Klein insists, there appear to be no actual and projectable---hence genuinely scientific---multiple realized kinds.\
Finally, Bickle (2010) questions whether the "second wave" of criticisms of the standard argument, those that challenge the multiple realization premise itself (discussed in section 2 above), give aid and comfort to psychoneural reductionists. Since psychoneural reductionism was one of the explicit targets of the standard multiple realization argument, one might plausibly assume that they do. Yet none of the "second wavers" are themselves reductionists (with the possible exception of Shapiro, and more recently Bechtel 2009, although his response to the multiple realization argument figures nowhere in his plumb for "mechanistic reduction"). Some (Polger 2004) are explicitly anti-reduction. (Though Polger 2004 is also explicitly anti-anti-reduction. He argues that multiple realization has little if anything to do with reduction.) This fact alone should give a psychoneural reductionist pause. Second, the direction that the second wave debates have developed, starting with Gillett\'s (2003) criticisms---deeply into the nature of the realization relation, and so into the metaphysics of science rather than into science itself---should prompt the psychoneural reductionist with a metascientific bent to simply tell the second wavers, thanks for nothing! Does that leave psychoneural reductionism back on its heels, in light of the standard multiple realization argument? Not at all, Bickle (2010) insists. For the "first wave" actual-scientific-history challenge to the first premise of the standard argument, and the initial critical discussions in section 2 above) turns out never to have been rejoined by anti-reductionists. Why not? Bickle speculates that Kim\'s more metaphysically-inspired challenge to the standard argument was the culprit. Non-reductive physicalists seem to have assumed that rejoining Kim\'s argument dismisses the entire first wave of challenges. It does not. There are numerous examples of multiply realized kinds that are components of scientific theories widely acknowledged to having been reduced to other theories. So multiple realizaation alone is no barrier to actual scientific reduction. The detailed scientific cases that fill in that "first wave" challenge to the standard argument remain unanswered to this day.\
So the renewed critical interest in multiple realizability, begun more than a decade ago, continues to the present day. The assumption that multiple realizability "seals the deal" against reductive physicalism and the type identity theory of mind was misplaced initially, and is now even more misplaced after the second wave of recent criticisms. Proponents of the standard argument need to follow Aizawa\'s and Gillett\'s recent leads, and offer new defenses and counter-responses. What is at stake here should not be underemphasized: nothing less than one of the most influential arguments from late-20th century Anglo-American philosophy, one that impacts not only the philosophical mind-body problem but also the relationship between sciences addressing higher and lower levels of the universe\'s organization.

Measure\
Measure

https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/multiple-realizability/

\#Multiple Realizability\# \#SEP
